---
author: volunteer nerd
---

**MPGA Issue Brief: Broadcast Bill**

# **Introduction**

Introduced by India\'s Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the
Draft Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill, 2023, aims to establish a
new regulatory framework for broadcasting services, replacing the Cable
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. It extends regulatory
control over various media platforms including television, radio, and
online platforms like YouTube and Netflix. It is the concern of citizens
that the bill could act as a censorship tool, particularly affecting
small, independent digital content creators and potentially suppressing
dissent. Furthermore, the bill grants extensive powers to the central
government, including the authority to modify or delete broadcasts and
to temporarily suspend channels.[^1]

# **Objectives and Key Features**

The stated objective of the bill is to create a unified regulatory
structure that encompasses "all" forms of broadcasting. The bill
proposes a registration regime wherin all broadcasters and network
operators must register with the government. It empowers the central
government to pass a specified program and advertisement code that
broadcasters must adhere to. Finally, it establishes a multi-tiered
self-regulatory structure including individual broadcasters,
Self-Regulatory Organizations (SROs), and a Broadcast Advisory Council
(BAC). The BAC can recommend penalties for broadcasters that violate the
regulation, which will be implemented by the central government.[^2]

# **Concerns and Criticisms**

We, as concerned citizens, argue that the bill could lead to increased
governmental control over media, potentially stifling freedom of speech
and increasing censorship further:

-   The government can order modifications to or removal of content
    > deemed non-compliant with the codes, raising concerns about
    > potential misuse for political gains. It has power to determine if
    > particular content violates the programme code. There is no
    > mechanism to appeal these decisions.[^3]

-   There is no clear appellate mechanism against the decisions of the
    > central government, which might lead to unchecked executive power.

-   The bill provides broad definitions and powers that could be
    > misinterpreted or misused to restrict content deemed uncomfortable
    > or undesirable under ambiguous grounds of \'public interest.\' The
    > definition of a "broadcaster" is ambiguous as well.

# **Comparative Analysis**

The proposed regulatory framework contrasts with international practices
where an independent body typically oversees broadcasting standards to
prevent government overreach. For instance, the UK\'s Ofcom operates
independently of governmental control, providing a more balanced
approach to regulation and freedom of expression. The Ofcom board is
composed of civil servants, respected broadcasters, and other voices
from the industry. India is already slipping on the press freedom
index[^4], and this Bill threatens to quicken that slide.

# **Recommendations**

The Broadcast Bill weakens democratic values, providing unprecedented
power to the Central Government to control information in the country.
The need of the hour is to establish institutions that empower citizens,
strengthen the broadcasting sector while protecting democratic values.
Ideally, this Bill should be withdrawn in its current state. If not,
extensive stakeholder consultation needs to be organised in order to:

-   [Establish an independent regulator:]{.underline} An independent
    > body, free of the yoke of the Central Government, should oversee
    > broadcasting standards, similar to the UK\'s Ofcom.

-   [Clarify definitions:]{.underline} Specific and narrow definitions
    > should be used for terms like \'public interest\' to prevent
    > abuse.

-   [Institute an appellate body:]{.underline} Introduce an appellate
    > mechanism similar to the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
    > Tribunal or Securities Appellate Tribunal for transparency and
    > fairness.[^5]

# **Conclusion**

The Draft Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill, 2023, has elicited
significant concern among various journalist bodies and media
associations. These groups, including the National Alliance of
Journalists and the Delhi Union of Journalists, have labelled the bill
as a potential gateway to increased censorship. They argue that the
bill\'s broad powers might allow the government to exercise undue
control over the media landscape, affecting everything from television
to digital platforms like YouTube and social media. The bill\'s approach
to regulating both traditional and online media under the same framework
is seen as particularly troubling, as it could lead to a homogenization
of content and a reduction in the diverse viewpoints that are vital for
a healthy democracy.

While the Draft Broadcasting Services Regulation Bill, 2023 aims to
modernize and streamline broadcasting regulations, it is crucial to
balance these goals with the protection of freedom of expression. In its
current form, it does not do that. Therefore, we demand that it be
withdrawn and a fresh bill be presented after intensive stakeholder
consultations, especially involving content creators in India.

**Suggested Questions**

Will the Minister of Information and Broadcasting be pleased to state:

> \(a\) Whether the Government has received any representations, and
> conducted any discussions with media organizations and civil society
> groups expressing concerns over potential over-censorship due to the
> Broadcasting Bill;
>
> \(b\) If so, the details thereof and the response of the Government;
>
> \(c\) Whether an OTT platform such as Netflix India, SonyLiv, and
> other such platforms shall be considered a 'Broadcaster' or
> 'Broadcasting Network Operators';
>
> \(d\) Whether a private citizen with a presence on a public platform,
> engaging in content creation or community outreach shall be considered
> a 'Broadcaster'.
>
> \(e\) Whether the [provision to prohibit the operation of broadcasting
> services or broadcasting network operators in 'public interest' is in
> violation of The Supreme Court (1995) decision to uphold the right to
> disseminate information is a part of the fundamental right to freedom
> of expression.]{.mark}
>
> [(f) Whether the Government plans to establish a grievance redressal
> system for appeals against the decisions of The Broadcast Advisory
> Council, or the Central Government.]{.mark}

**Recent Developments**

**Correspondence between the MIB and Stakeholders:**

Despite multiple requests and an RTI to make the consultation process
transparent, and stakeholder comments public, the MIB, since the
publishing of the draft bill in November 2023, has remained vague and
dubious, refusing to communicate with agencies like the Internet Freedom
Foundation.

**July 9th, 2024: Closed door meetings with big-pocketed stakeholders**

The MIB holds a meeting with stakeholders like Netflix and Hotstar,
streaming platforms like Spotify, social media companies with the likes
of Google and Meta, and industry associations including FICCI, NBA, and
IAMAI. The Ministry has also requested feedback and comments within
three weeks (by July 31) on the latest version of the bill.

The draft proposed the formation of individual content evaluation
committees with members from various social groups who will review and
sign off on shows before they are released. It is to be noted that all
films in Indian cinemas are reviewed and certified by a
government-appointed board, whereas streamed content is not.

Storyboard18 earlier reported that according to internal reports and
industry sources, the government is now also mulling a significant new
proposal to include User Generated Content on social media platforms,
when such content is put out by \"professionals\". The content generated
by \"professional creators\" on social media will be regulated under the
proposed Broadcast Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023.

To be sure, under the existing IT rules content regulation on social
media platforms lies with the Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology (MeitY). However, under the new proposal, when passed, such
content created by creator \"professionals\" on social media platforms
like YouTube will be regulated by both the MIB and MeitY.

Ambiguities regarding the role and responsibilities of platforms like
Google and Meta, definitions of who or what constitutes professional
creators and content, and scope and scale of the regulation that would
potentially require millions of creators to be registered under the BSR
act, have raised concerns among stakeholders.

**July 26th, 2024: Hindustan Times reviews the second draft of the
Broadcasting Bill 2024**

[Individuals who routinely upload videos to social media, make podcasts
or write about current affairs online could be classified as digital
news broadcasters, according to the new draft of the broadcasting bill
that the government shared with stakeholders.]{.mark}

[When the Bill was first released for public consultation in November
2023, it was unclear whether or not news content creators online can
attract obligations imposed on streaming platforms ('OTT broadcasting
services'). The 2024 version proposes to bring them under the ambit of
the law by introducing the new category called digital news
broadcasters.]{.mark}

[It attempts to address the ambiguity created by the first draft on this
aspect by defining "professional" as a person engaged in an occupation
or vocation, and "systematic activity" as "any structured or organised
activity that involves an element of planning, method, continuity or
persistence" -- basically covering any influencers who touch on topics
of social, political relevance. To be sure, the bill is still in the
public feedback stage, and all changes will have to go through the Union
Cabinet before it is tabled in Parliament.]{.mark}

[The definition of OTT broadcasting service has also been revised due to
which not only Netflix and Amazon Prime Video , but also content
creators who regularly upload their content to social media can arguably
be OTT broadcasting services.]{.mark}

[For instance, a chartered accountant who posts videos on YouTube and
Instagram about how to file IT returns is a 'professional' under the
Bill and can attract provisions of the Bill if they have enough
followers/subscribers. A journalist who tweets regularly is covered by
it too.]{.mark}

[The new Bill also allows the government to prescribe different due
diligence guidelines for social media platforms and online advertisement
intermediaries, and requires all intermediaries to "provide appropriate
information, including information pertaining to the OTT broadcasters
and Digital News Broadcasters on its platform" to the central government
to ensure compliance with the act.]{.mark}

[If the intermediary does not comply with the government's directions,
it stands to lose its safe harbour (exemption from liability for third
party content) and can attract penal provisions under the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Bill says.]{.mark}

[The bill also clarifies that if an OTT broadcasting service or a
digital news broadcaster is a user on a social media platform, the two
broadcasters will be responsible for complying with the act, not the
social media company.]{.mark}

**ABOUT US\
**Make Parliament Great Again (#MPGA) is a citizen's initiative that
aims to raise citizen issues with Parliamentarians from across the
political spectrum with the objective of reclaiming the Parliament as
the House of the People.

[^1]: Damani, P., & Chakrabarty, T. (2024). *The Draft Broadcasting
    Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023* (Legislative Brief). PRS
    Legislative Research.
    https://prsindia.org/billtrack/prs-products/prs-legislative-brief-1713951499

[^2]: ibid.

[^3]: ibid.

[^4]: *India \| rsf*. (2024, July 12). Reporters Without Borders.
    https://rsf.org/en/country/india

[^5]: Damani, P., & Chakrabarty, T. (2024). *The Draft Broadcasting
    Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023* (Legislative Brief). PRS
    Legislative Research.
    https://prsindia.org/billtrack/prs-products/prs-legislative-brief-1713951499
