---
layout: default
title: "Mpga Issue Brief_ Local Government (Done)"
permalink: /documents/_bengaluru_2024/MPGA Issue Brief_ Local Government (done)/
author: volunteer nerd
---




**MPGA Issue Brief: Importance of Local Government and the Need for
Elections in Urban Local Bodies in Karnataka**

**Introduction**

There is a governance vacuum in the urban areas of Karnataka, especially
Bengaluru which is reflected by the delay in conducting elections for
the Urban Local Body. The lowest level of government is critical for
overseeing everyday needs of citizens like roads, sewers, water,
electricity, parks and other essential civic amenities. The last
election to Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) was almost 9 years
ago and the office of the Mayor of Bengaluru is vacant for 4 years.
Across the state, elections for 1,101 wards of 30 zilla panchayats and
3,621 wards of 234 taluk panchayats have been delayed since 2021 due to
the state government's failure to release the reservation matrix. The
State Election Commission (SEC) has filed a contempt case against the
government to address this delay, further highlighting the urgent need
for timely local elections. This policy brief highlights the importance
of a local government and provides potential solutions primarily
gathered from citizen fora and public demands.

### Issues

-   **Governance Vacuum**: Since the conclusion of the last BBMP
    elections in 2015, the absence of corporators has resulted in a lack
    of local accountability and delayed civic projects. Without local
    representatives, Bengaluru's infrastructure, including waste
    management, road maintenance, and public services, has deteriorated.
    Local governance functions have been taken over by bureaucrats and
    MLAs, reducing the direct engagement between citizens and their
    local government; there are only 28 MLAs, nearly one-tenth of the
    243 BBMP councillors.

-   The tabled [**[Greater Bengaluru Governance Bill
    2024]{.underline}**](https://data.opencity.in/dataset/b55b4051-70a9-40f8-a688-6af90f5c7547/resource/2e6ec894-277f-4671-8c82-1e8ddd2dc23d/download/gba-22.07.2024final.pdf)
    has been criticised for some important shortcomings that undermine a
    citizen powered local government.

    -   [Lack of Transparency and Accountability:]{.underline} The bill
        > does not provide for comprehensive civic data disclosures,
        > internal audits, or an ombudsman for service-related issues.

    -   [Weak Governance Structure:]{.underline} The bill construes the
        > Greater Bengaluru Authority (GBA) as a super municipality,
        > undermining the powers of the mayor and council. As there is
        > no clarity on the division of powers between local and central
        > authorities, the authority of local councils is seemingly
        > reduced.

    -   [No Provisions for Planning:]{.underline} The bill lacks
        > provisions for integrated planning for the Greater Bengaluru
        > Area and a three-tiered planning system.

-   The failure to release the reservation matrix for 1,101 wards of
    zilla panchayats and 3,621 wards of taluk panchayats has led to
    elections being postponed since 2021. This delay impacts rural
    governance and reduces the efficiency of services like healthcare,
    education, and rural development.

-   The delay in BBMP elections has been attributed to political
    lobbying by MLAs who benefit from the absence of corporators. In the
    absence of elected officials, MLAs have exerted increased influence
    over local administrative decisions, diminishing the role of
    citizens in governance. This interference weakens the democratic
    process and undermines the transparency and accountability of local
    governance structures.

#### What needs to be done?

We urge that the SEC must be empowered to conduct ULB elections without
further political or administrative interference. The reservation matrix
must be released immediately to facilitate elections for zilla and taluk
panchayats. Timely elections will restore local governance and ensure
that citizens have direct representation in addressing urban and rural
challenges.\
\
The Greater Bengaluru Governance Bill, 2024, must be revised to ensure
that it strengthens, rather than diminishes, local democracy. The bill
should empower local elected representatives and ensure that the Brand
Bengaluru Committee serves a complementary, rather than controlling,
role in governance​​. Citizen participation in decision-making should be
expanded, not curtailed, by this bill. Feedback and suggestions from the
citizens and stakeholders must be an integral part of the drafting
process of the updated bill.

Citizen participation in governance should be strengthened by empowering
ward committees and area sabhas. These bodies should have a greater role
in urban planning, budgeting, and service delivery, ensuring that local
concerns are addressed directly.

Amendments should be made to the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act to
ensure that local body elections are conducted every five years without
delays. The act should include provisions for timely mayoral elections
within 15 days of the conclusion of ULB elections.

**Why would it benefit the People?**

-   Timely elections will [restore accountability in
    governance]{.underline}, enabling local representatives to [directly
    address the concerns of citizens]{.underline}. Elected corporators
    can ensure that public services, infrastructure, and urban planning
    initiatives are implemented effectively.

-   Empowering local bodies through timely elections and implementing
    the 74th Amendment's provisions for [devolution of power will
    strengthen local democracy]{.underline}. This will allow citizens to
    participate more actively in the governance process and ensure that
    their voices are heard .

-   Reforms to ward committees and area sabhas will [enhance citizen
    engagement]{.underline} in local governance, ensuring that their
    [needs and concerns are prioritised]{.underline} in decision-making
    processes .

The prolonged delay in ULB elections in Karnataka, particularly for
BBMP, has weakened local governance, reduced service delivery
efficiency, and diminished citizen engagement. Timely elections and
legal reforms are crucial to restoring effective governance and
empowering local representatives. The Greater Bengaluru Governance Bill,
2024, should be reformed to protect local democracy and enhance citizen
participation. Immediate action is needed to ensure the release of the
reservation matrix and to conduct elections without further delays.

**ABOUT US\
**Make Parliament Great Again (#MPGA) is a citizen's initiative that
aims to raise public issues with representatives & decision makers from
across the political spectrum with the objective of reclaiming the
Parliament as the House of the People.

**[Sources and further reading:]{.mark}**

-   [[Karnataka poll panel plans to complete elections to all local
    bodies by
    Dec-end]{.underline}](https://www.deccanherald.com/india/karnataka/state-poll-panel-plans-to-complete-elections-to-all-local-bodies-by-dec-end-3143396)

-   [[Greater Bengaluru Governance Bill: Where is Brand Bengaluru
    vision? And the people\'s voice? - Citizen
    Matters]{.underline}](https://citizenmatters.in/greater-bengaluru-bill-2024-brand-bengaluru-committee-greater-bengaluru-authority/)

-   [[Open letter to Deputy CM: Reconsider BBMP's proposed
    restructuring - Citizen
    Matters]{.underline}](https://citizenmatters.in/open-letter-reconsideration-of-bbmp-proposed-restructuring-greater-bengaluru-authority-bill/)

-   [[Bengaluru has not had elected corporators for 20 months: Why you
    should
    care]{.underline}](https://www.thenewsminute.com/karnataka/bengaluru-has-not-had-elected-corporators-20-months-why-you-should-care-163797)

-   [[Real reason BBMP polls are delayed: Bengaluru MLAs are lobbying
    against
    it]{.underline}](https://www.thenewsminute.com/karnataka/real-reason-bbmp-polls-are-delayed-bengaluru-mlas-are-lobbying-against-it-163804)

-   [[City corporations in Karnataka do not have full control over 15 of
    the 18 municipal functions, finds study - The
    Hindu]{.underline}](https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/city-corporations-in-karnataka-do-not-have-full-control-over-15-of-the-18-municipal-functions-finds-study/article68589799.ece)

-   [['Greater Bengaluru Governance Bill 2024 will only take city
    backwards', claims study \| Bangalore News - The Indian
    Express]{.underline}](https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/bangalore/greater-governance-bill-2024-take-city-backwards-claims-study-9503293/)

-   [[New urban governance bill in Bengaluru faces criticism, takes away
    citizen power says
    analysis]{.underline}](https://india.mongabay.com/2024/09/new-urban-governance-bill-in-bengaluru-faces-criticism-takes-away-citizen-power-says-analysis/)

-   [[\[Commentary\] Timely municipal elections enable local leaders to
    act locally and mitigate climate
    impacts]{.underline}](https://india.mongabay.com/2023/06/commentary-timely-municipal-elections-enable-local-leaders-to-act-locally-and-mitigate-climate-impacts/)

**[Appendix 1 : Jhatkaa.org petition with 8000+ signatures]{.mark}**

**Conduct BBMP Elections Now!**

**Decision Makers:**

1.  D. K. Shivakumar, Deputy Chief Minister of Karnataka

**Demands:\
**Conduct BBMP elections immediately, with a clear timeline

**Introduction\
\
**It has been **nearly nine years** since the BBMP (Bruhat Bengaluru
Mahanagara Palike) **last conducted council elections**. These
elections, which are conducted once every five years, were supposed to
be held in 2020. However, the posts still remain vacant. The BBMP, which
is the second largest municipal corporation after Mumbai, is
**responsible for the smooth functioning and maintenance of civic and
infrastructural assets** in Bengaluru.\
\
The delay has caused a "governance vacuum," and has reduced political
**accountability and transparency**. For instance, without elected
representatives, *decisions about budget allocations and urban
development projects lack the scrutiny that elected officials would be
accountable for*. Consequently this has resulted in a disconnect between
the needs of the citizens and the administration.

**What Is The Issue?\
\
**Absence of proper elected officials means that there is a
**dysfunction in essential mechanisms** like ward committee meetings
which are necessary for addressing issues such as water scarcity, waste
and road management. The lack of accountable authorities has **left many
issues unresolved and unaddressed.** The main challenges experienced by
the citizens include:

1.  **Failing Infrastructure:** Lack of management has led to roads
    being poorly maintained, thereby causing disrepair. In areas like
    Outer Ring Road and Sarjapur Road, the condition of internal roads
    is deplorable due to lack of maintenance and repair, making it
    **dangerous** for both vehicles and pedestrians. Additionally,
    inadequate street lights have exacerbated the issue as **poorly lit
    streets lead to a higher risk of night-time accidents**.

2.  **Inefficient Essential Services:** Due to improper management of
    traffic, roads have become very congested. Lack of accountability
    also means waste management systems have failed. This has caused
    delays in garbage collection and improper disposal of waste
    eventually leading to **unsanitary conditions in many areas.\
    **

3.  **Safety Risks:** Data from the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB)
    for 2022 shows that **Bengaluru has the highest number of deaths due
    to negligence of the civic body.** Broken footpaths, pothole-ridden
    roads, hanging cables have put lives at risk. There has also been an
    alarming increase in the number of pedestrian fatalities - between
    2021 and 2023, the number has jumped by 77% due to the lack of
    proper civic infrastructure.

To ensure the safety and well-being, as well as efficient management of
Bengaluru, it is critical to **conduct BBMP elections** without further
delay. An elected body would be directly accountable to the public,
ensuring that urgent issues receive the necessary attention and action
they deserve.\
\
Join us in demanding that the BBMP elections be conducted with immediate
effect to **restore effective governance** and improve the quality of
life in *Namma Bengaluru.\
\
*By signing this petition, we can collectively work towards a safer,
better-planned, and more livable Bengaluru.

*Sources*

1.  [[BBMP restructuring bill an excuse to delay Council elections:
    Citizens
    forum]{.underline}](https://www.deccanherald.com/india/karnataka/bengaluru/bbmp-restructuring-bill-an-excuse-to-delay-council-elections-citizens-forum-3105490)

2.  [[Delay in BBMP polls causing much
    angst]{.underline}](https://bangaloremirror.indiatimes.com/bangalore/others/delay-in-bbmp-polls-causing-much-angst/articleshow/111216585.cms)

3.  [[Pedestrian deaths in Bengaluru jumped by 77% in last 3
    years]{.underline}](https://www.deccanherald.com/india/karnataka/bengaluru/pedestrian-deaths-in-bengaluru-jumped-by-77-in-last-3-years-2968202)

4.  [[Bengaluru: Pedestrian Deaths Up By 77 Per Cent In Last 3 Years,
    Who\'s
    Responsible?]{.underline}](https://www.timesnownews.com/bengaluru/bengaluru-pedestrian-deaths-up-by-77-per-cent-in-last-3-years-whos-responsible-article-109169155)

5.  [[Governance paralysis: The impact of no BBMP election on Bengaluru
    civic
    life]{.underline}](https://thesouthfirst.com/karnataka/governance-paralysis-the-impact-of-no-bbmp-election-on-bengaluru-civic-life/)

6.  [[Citizens tired of grimy situations, await
    fixes]{.underline}](https://bangaloremirror.indiatimes.com/bangalore/others/citizens-tired-of-grimy-situations-await-fixes/articleshow/109112148.cms)

7.  [*[https://x.com/search?q=BBMP%20election&src=typed_query]{.underline}*](https://x.com/search?q=BBMP%20election&src=typed_query)

**[Appendix 2 : Open Letter from Citizens' Action Forum's
President]{.mark}**

Dear Deputy Chief Minister DK Shivakumar,

We write to you to express some concerns that Citizens' Action Forum
(CAF) and a significant section of the citizenry have regarding the
proposed restructuring of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP).
At the outset, we do believe that there are positives in the concept.

However, there are concerns with the process, a few assumptions made,
and the lack of details regarding the implementation of such a major
decision.

Our concerns are listed as follows:

There is an assumption that the principal problem plaguing BBMP's
functioning is its size. This is clearly not the case as brought out
even by the Restructuring Report of the Patil committee. The division of
the BBMP is perhaps a last step in a series of more systemic measures.

The BBMP, even currently, has a dearth of resources and skilled
manpower. The division of the civic body will need an increased quantum
of these resources to make it work. With no solution to the resources
problem, the division will create more problems than solutions.

An exercise of this magnitude will have significant implications for the
exchequer. Not even the briefest of a white paper has been published on
the impact and who will shoulder the same.

We request a concrete rollout plan discussed in the public domain before
taking the steps required to transform this proposal into an Act. Such a
rollout plan could possibly list the various steps and crucial
prerequisites that need to be in place before any final step is taken.

The objective of bringing all parastatals into a coordinated Greater
Bengaluru Authority (GBA) is certainly laudable. However, this will only
be an exercise in futility without actually amending the individual
Parastatal Acts to acknowledge their reporting structure to the GBA.
This was attempted with the introduction of the Bangalore Metropolitan
Region Development Authority (BMRDA) a long time ago. The effort failed
miserably. Without an appraisal of why the earlier attempt did not
succeed it is unlikely that the present proposal will work this time
around either.

Of real concern is the imminent disempowering of the councillor and the
city coming under state control. The citizens of Bengaluru desperately
need a full time Mayor and empowered councillors to run the city on a
daily basis and at a detailed level.

The Chief Minister has the onerous task of leading our state. It is
unfair to all concerned to expect a Chief Minister to devote adequate
time and be involved in the day-to-day running of the city. The state
government anyway has oversight powers on municipalities and we believe
that the relation between the municipality and state should be
maintained. There is a very real possibility, as it stands, for the city
to be run by MLAs, MPs and the state government.

citizens discussing issues at WCM

Bengaluru needs a dedicated full-time mayor and empowered councillors

We already have the Nagarpalika Act or the 74th Amendment in our
Constitution. We believe in many areas the GBA proposal will be hard
pressed to stand up against this constitutional provision. Further, we
have not even tried to implement the Constitution in spirit and law. The
first step needs to be a close adherence to these constitutional
provisions.

For the past four years, the city administration has not had an elected
council, making the BBMP just a partial body. First delimitation, and
then seat reservations were the reasons given to courts. Then we were
assured that after the 2024 Lok Sabha elections we would have an elected
council. Now, we would appear to have a new reason to justify
postponement based on a 2016 report, which itself did not find favour
with large segments of society. This gives some credence to the fear
among many citizens that the GBA proposal is, in essence, another way of
postponing elections indefinitely.

We ask that the right thing be done -- to adhere to the Constitution,
hold elections to the BBMP council and have a BBMP council, which is
representative. The GBA proposal must be thought of as just that -- an
initial proposal. It needs to go through a standing committee, public
discourses and discussions and a much stronger detailing for
implementation and cost.

Meanwhile, there are a host of remedial actions that need to be taken
within the BBMP, some of which the Restructuring Report itself
identifies.

Further, the various individual Acts of the parastatals have to be
changed to reflect their reporting to the BBMP or its successors.

We request for more public discussions and debates on this matter before
enactment of the same. We also look forward to a confirmed date for the
BBMP council elections so that we have a powerful Mayor with empowered
councillors, who are directly answerable to the citizenry.

Thank you,

Yours sincerely,\
Vijayan Menon\
President, CAF

