---
layout: default
title: "Policy Brief_ The Importance Of Census In India (Done)"
permalink: /documents/_bengaluru_2024/Policy Brief_ The Importance of Census in India (done)/
author: volunteer nerd
---




**Policy Brief: The Importance of Census in India**

**Introduction**

The census and allied statistical exercises are essential for any nation
to plan and allocate resources effectively. In India, they play a
crucial role in understanding the socio-economic landscape. However, the
ongoing delay in India\'s 2021 census, caused by the COVID-19 pandemic
and other issues, has created significant gaps in data, limiting the
government and civic society's ability to understand their country,
address pressing issues, and implement effective policies.

**The Growing Divide**

India's decennial census provides critical data on population, housing,
and socio-economic conditions; it often underpins policymaking and
resource distribution. For example, it is vital to determine electoral
constituencies and ensure fair representation based on population
changes. Being a comprehensive assessment of demographic data, it allows
researchers and policymakers alike to analyse the effectiveness of
policies, e.g. the improvement in homeownership throughout the 1980s,
1990s and 2000s is very clear when the decennial census numbers are
assessed. However, the longer the census is delayed, the more
significant the gap between the population surveys and its trends, as
well as the sample surveys, administrative data, and smaller surveys.

Conversely, the lack of data reduces the effectiveness of government
schemes. Dreze and others calculated that more than 100 million people
are excluded from the Public Distribution System as the government still
depends on 2011 figures to determine who is eligible for aid.

Amitabh Kundu and PC Mohanan, in their Economic and Political Weekly
article from 2023, observe that this divide between survey and official
data is concerning in myriad ways. Their primary concern is the lack of
cross-validation between administrative and survey data due to the lack
of the latter. As India develops, we must ensure that no one falls
behind. However, we have little reliable country-wide understanding of
India\'s healthcare, education, and infrastructure without adequate
information consistently measured over time.

**What Data Do We Need?**

As this gap grows, there are additional concerns about the information
required to understand India truly. Is the census enough? The
Socio-Economic and Caste Census conducted in 2011 never released its
caste-based data but was a treasure trove of information about
deprivation and systemic poverty in India. Numerous other statistical
sources have flourished in the subsequent lacuna of population-level
statistics.

Administrative databases are frequently used to measure policy
effectiveness. Every scheme now has a "dashboard" showing the policy\'s
headline figures. However, these figures often disagree with other
surveys. In the absence of a population-level study, the "true" figure
is up to the reader's discretion. For example, the National Annual Rural
Sanitation Survey (2019-20), The 2018 NSSO survey on sanitation and
housing, and the National Family Health Survey (2019-21) all measured
access to sanitation. The NARSS found that 93.5% of the rural households
had access to improved sanitation facilities - the same number was
between 69% and 71%, according to the NSSO and NFHS. (Kundu and
Mohannan, 2023). While different definitions of "improved" toilet and
"access" could explain some of this discrepancy, the rest remains a
mystery. If the government believes the NARSS survey, India could be
considered open defecation-free and only needs to maintain the status
quo, but the NSSO and NFHS tell a different story.

Key demographic trends remain unknown, affecting long-term planning. The
lack of updated data complicates targeting beneficiaries for essential
programs, exacerbating issues related to poverty and inequality. For
instance, the government's aim to provide housing and healthcare faces
setbacks due to inaccurate population estimates.

The delayed census has resulted in policymakers relying on data
containing discrepancies. When there is no population census, there is
no arbiter to the divergence between the institutional surveys and
official government reporting. The delays have triggered debates over
the reliability of India's statistical system. Discrepancies between
sample surveys and administrative data have led some experts to question
the validity of the sample surveys' data, resulting in scepticism about
government statistics.

**Solutions**

According to reports by Reuters earlier this year, India's delayed
census would begin this September. However, there have been no official
communications to this effect. The first step to rectify this growing
lacuna is to conduct the census and restore faith in India's capacity to
collect reliable information.

As the country grows and concerns over inequity rise, it is important
that a focus on the Socio-Economic and Caste Census is created. In
addition, the reliability of the NSSO should be improved by ensuring
that it is free of political influence and operates as an independent
body.

Finally, improving the access and usefulness of administrative data is
important. The open data policy of the central government is an
important step towards this, and developing consistent definitions, data
collection policies, and ensuring consistency will allow us to improve
our understanding of what is, maybe, the most populous country in the
world.

**Conclusion**

India's census is the cornerstone of its governance, providing
indispensable data for planning, policy-making, and development across
sectors. The delayed 2021 census has created a critical data void,
hindering the government\'s ability to assess socio-economic progress,
target resources effectively, and validate policy outcomes. Immediate
action to conduct the census is essential, along with bolstering the
credibility and independence of surveys like the NSSO. Additionally,
enhancing administrative data reliability and transparency through
consistent definitions and standards is crucial for ensuring informed
decision-making in the world\'s most populous democracy.

**ABOUT US\
**Make Parliament Great Again (#MPGA) is a citizen's initiative that
aims to raise citizen issues with representatives & decision makers from
across the political spectrum with the objective of reclaiming the
Parliament as the House of the People.

Sources and additional reading

[[https://scroll.in/article/959235/100-million-indians-fall-through-gaps-in-food-safety-net-economists-urge-rethink-on-covid-19-relief]{.underline}](https://scroll.in/article/959235/100-million-indians-fall-through-gaps-in-food-safety-net-economists-urge-rethink-on-covid-19-relief)

[[https://www.epw.in/journal/2023/21/commentary/data-discrepancies-between-national-surveys-and.html]{.underline}](https://www.epw.in/journal/2023/21/commentary/data-discrepancies-between-national-surveys-and.html)

[[https://www.epw.in/journal/2023/32/editorials/do-not-undermine-national-statistical-system.html]{.underline}](https://www.epw.in/journal/2023/32/editorials/do-not-undermine-national-statistical-system.html)

[[https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-024-02321-9]{.underline}](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-024-02321-9)

