---
layout: default
title: "Public Transport (Done)"
permalink: /documents/_bengaluru_2024/Public Transport (Done)/
author: volunteer nerd
---




**Need For More Bus Public Transport And Last Mile Connectivity In
Bangalore**

In Bangalore, buses form the backbone of the public transport
infrastructure. The current operational metro network is 74 km long, in
contrast, BMTC's operational jurisdiction extends far beyond the outer
limits of BBMP. From school and college students, daily wage earners to
white collar employees at large IT firms, buses are the preferred mode
of transport for lakhs of people travelling within Bangalore.
Pre-pandemic the BMTC would record 30-35 Lakh commuters per day. The
Shakti scheme gave BMTC's ridership a massive boost, increasing the
number of women travellers to upto 15 lakhs per day. The BMTC forms the
backbone of public transportation in Bangalore, but it suffers from some
key systemic challenges.

BMTC has a bus fleet size of 6,132 buses, including non-AC, AC and
electric buses. This fleet has been stagnant since 2017, a fact
highlighted by the Directorate of Urban Local Transport.. However, the
number of buses available to the general public is only 5,102 (excluding
the buses allocated to charter services), owing to crew shortages and
soaring diesel prices. BMTC's fleet size has been unable to keep pace
with the growing demands, and its inefficient payments infrastructure
remains largely cash-dependent, resulting in several inefficiencies and
inconveniences for both passengers and conductors. For example, citizens
have been refused service when offering to pay for tickets using UPI.

The BMTC operates fewer schedules than it used to before the pandemic.
In the face of poor public transportation, the residents of Bangalore
have no option but to take matters into their own hands. There has been
an explosive growth in private two and four wheelers choking Bangalore's
roads, leading to congestion, pollution, and increasing travel times.

According to data on BMTC's website, 51 "metro feeder" route schedules
exist, which are supposed to act as feeder services for commuters
residing near terminal metro stations. However, the bus infrastructure
is poorly integrated with the metro and other public transport, leading
to inefficiencies. For example, metro terminal stations like Nagasandra,
Chalaghatta, and Silk Institute lack any useful metro feeder bus
services. The bus routes that exist are extremely infrequent.

Finally, the BMTC services reduce in frequency after the evening peak
hours, leading to longer wait times, overcrowding, and little safe
public transportation for women.

The BMTC has the capacity to be a key service to the people of
Bangalore, moving the metropolis as it grows. Some key improvements in
the system must be made for this goal to be achievable.

**Proposed Solutions**

**1. Payment Integration** :

Despite its pivotal role in the city's transportation network, commuters
have experienced rude behaviour from conductors, particularly when
unable to provide exact change. In Delhi, Mumbai, and Chennai SBI-NCMC
cards can be used to make payments on both metro and bus networks of the
respective cities. BMRCL launched its version of the NCMC card with RBL
Bank in 2023. The BMRCL NCMC cannot be used to make payments on BMTC
Buses as BMTC has failed to integrate the NCMC card into its ticketing
infrastructure. The BMTC has failed to implement UPI in 100% of its
operational bus fleet. In many instances, conductors have cited
technical issues with UPI or have outright refused UPI as a mode of
payment for tickets. A shared payment medium between BMRCL and BMTC and
100% certainty of being able to perform UPI payments on BMTC Buses is
the critical need of the hour for all commuters. Cashless payments
improve the commuter experience, the efficiency of ticket collections,
as well as time taken to make payments.

**2. Improved last-mile connectivity:**

Improper integration between BMTC and BMRCL causes last-mile
connectivity problems for commuters within 1-3 kilometres of metro
stations. Other metropolises in the country have developed ingenious
solutions to the same, the Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) has tied up
with Uber to provide shuttle services to bridge the last mile
connectivity. BMTC should explore similar private tie-ups or work out
Public-Private models to fill the last mile gap. It is important to
advertise this gap in short-range transportation as a gap that needs to
be filled by reliable and safe transport options.

**3. Reduction in frequency of buses after evening peak hours leading to
longer wait times for buses leading to overcrowding:**

It is essential to coordinate BMTC bus timings with metro services,
ensuring seamless connectivity from 5 AM to 11 PM. A comprehensive study
of staff and bus availability during off-peak hours can help optimize
resource allocation. Understanding passenger behaviour during both peak
and off-peak times will enable the rationalization of overlapping bus
routes, allowing for the redistribution of buses to routes with higher
demand. This strategy will also facilitate extending services to
underserved areas within the network. Additionally, improving real-time
bus tracking apps, similar to the Chalo App implemented in Mumbai's BEST
buses, can provide passengers with greater convenience and confidence in
public transportation.

**Conclusion**

In conclusion, addressing the challenges facing BMTC's public transport
system and enhancing last-mile connectivity is crucial to improving the
overall mobility experience in Bangalore. With the city\'s growing
population and increasing reliance on personal vehicles, the need for a
robust and efficient public transportation system has never been
greater.

Integrating payment solutions across BMTC and BMRCL, exploring
public-private partnerships for last-mile connectivity, and optimising
bus schedules to align with metro services are essential to ensure
accessibility, convenience, and safety for all commuters.

It is important to recognise buses as the cost-efficient public
transportation solution they are. Priority bus corridors cost only five
crores per km, compared to the 275 crores per km required for metro
rail. By implementing these changes, BMTC can better serve the city\'s
diverse population, reduce traffic congestion, and create a more
sustainable urban transport network.

**ABOUT US**

Make Parliament Great Again (#MPGA) is a citizen's initiative that aims
to raise public issues with representatives & decision makers from
across the political spectrum with an objective of reclaiming Parliament
as the House of the People.

**Sources**

*Personal Experience as a resident of Bangalore.*

[[https://mybmtc.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf-files/Metro%20feeder%20route%20details/MFList21082024.pdf]{.underline}](https://mybmtc.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf-files/Metro%20feeder%20route%20details/MFList21082024.pdf)

[[https://mybmtc.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf-files/PerformanceIndicatorsEngPdf.pdf]{.underline}](https://mybmtc.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf-files/PerformanceIndicatorsEngPdf.pdf)

[[https://dult.karnataka.gov.in/assets/front/pdf/Comprehensive_Mobility_Plan.pdf]{.underline}](https://dult.karnataka.gov.in/assets/front/pdf/Comprehensive_Mobility_Plan.pdf)

[[https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/despite-earlier-resolution-bmtc-upi-payment-errors-resurface-causing-inconvenience-to-commuters/article68182746.ece]{.underline}](https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/despite-earlier-resolution-bmtc-upi-payment-errors-resurface-causing-inconvenience-to-commuters/article68182746.ece)

[[https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/reversing-the-trend-bengalurus-bmtc-regains-ridership-with-free-bus-travel-for-women-10846551.html]{.underline}](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/reversing-the-trend-bengalurus-bmtc-regains-ridership-with-free-bus-travel-for-women-10846551.html)

[[Can Bengaluru Metro's last mile connectivity gaps be filled by players
beyond BMTC? - The
Hindu]{.underline}](https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/can-bengaluru-metros-last-mile-connectivity-gaps-be-filled-by-players-beyond-bmtc/article68212864.ece)

[[Bengaluru likely to see KYC-less national common mobility cards in
early
March]{.underline}](https://www.deccanherald.com/india/karnataka/bengaluru/bengaluru-likely-to-see-kyc-less-national-common-mobility-cards-in-early-march-2910980)

[[https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/5000-national-common-mobility-cards-sold-in-six-months-since-launch-namma-metro-encouraging-passengers-to-use-ncmc-in-bengaluru/article67222715.ece]{.underline}](https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/5000-national-common-mobility-cards-sold-in-six-months-since-launch-namma-metro-encouraging-passengers-to-use-ncmc-in-bengaluru/article67222715.ece)

[[https://transit.sbi/]{.underline}](https://transit.sbi/)

[[https://youtu.be/cgc6iBxkImk?si=4bnjVGv9Iz76yenw]{.underline}](https://youtu.be/cgc6iBxkImk?si=4bnjVGv9Iz76yenw)

[[https://youtu.be/3SNF3MjPIJc?si=IHfJFqCmZy1jcf9F]{.underline}](https://youtu.be/3SNF3MjPIJc?si=IHfJFqCmZy1jcf9F)

[[Tata Motors fined â‚¹17 lakh for not linking 250 buses with Chalo App \|
Mumbai news - Hindustan
Times]{.underline}](https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/mumbai-news/tata-motors-fined-17-lakh-for-not-linking-250-buses-with-chalo-app-101675709993569.html)

