---
layout: default
title: "Renewable Energy In Karnataka (Done)"
permalink: /documents/_bengaluru_2024/Renewable Energy in Karnataka (done)/
author: volunteer nerd
---




**Status of Renewable Energy in Karnataka**

The recent reports of massive natural disasters and unprecedented
numbers of people dying from pollution calls for quick action in the
nation's energy sector. According to a model designed by Lancet
Planetary Health, more than 2.1 million people die annually in the
country from air pollution, making India reach second highest in the
list surpassed only by China. The model also highlights the number of
deaths in various cities, with Bengaluru also in the top ten list with
4.8% (1,04,640) of the deaths, and Delhi topping the board with 11.5%
(2,50,704).

It must also be noted that the report only analyses reported deaths
caused by air pollution. Combining water and soil, the total number of
reported deaths is much higher. Not to mention the innumerable rural
villages where people are dying every day without any medical authority
to examine and report such fatalities.

As such, transitioning to a power grid fed by renewable energy is the
need of the hour. It will help reduce reliance on fossil fuels and
imports to meet the current energy requirements. At the same time, more
charging stations and massive subsidies in EVs shall result in an
increased share on the road when compared to IC vehicles.

While Karnataka has been among the top five states in India when it
comes to renewable energy, drastic measures are required to meet the
goal of 500 GW from RE by 2030 as highlighted in the Karnataka Renewable
Energy Policy 2022-2027. As per Karnataka Renewable Energy Development
Limited, the current allotted capacity (including ISTS) is 34,165.675
MW, with an additional 6,624.155 MW commissioned. However, there is also
mention of a [cancelled capacity of 12,591 MW]{.underline} in the past
three years without any official reason. The report is as recent as 31st
of July, 2024 and includes solar, wind, small hydro, biomass, co-gen,
and hybrid projects.

The solution to the problems in quality introduces a Bill to maximize
the harnessing potential of Karnataka from renewable energy. It prevents
the commissioning to be cancelled without any valid reason while
introducing incentives for new projects to ensure that renewable energy
goals of the state are met within due time.

# **The Issue at Hand:** The renewable energy potential of Karnataka is vast but not fully realised with adequate RE infrastructure. For instance, the district of Vijayapura has a wind energy potential of 12,946.2 MW, but only 2,468.85 MW has been allotted with a commissioned capacity of just 1055.6 MW. In addition, many of the [previously commissioned projects have been cancelled]{.underline} without official reason.

# **Proposed Solution:** We propose the [establishment of a statewide body of qualified engineers, scientists, and researchers]{.underline}. It would examine each and every RE project tender before it is declared cancelled to ensure that adequate transparency persists between the government and the citizens. Moreover, they shall be responsible to [explore further avenues of renewable energy]{.underline} which have not yet been commissioned, such as geothermal energy, tidal energy, and green hydrogen production.

# **Legal Route to Address the Issue:** According to clauses (d) through (f) under section 15 of the [Energy Conservation Act, 2001]{.underline}, the state has the power to, with consultation from the Energy Efficiency Bureau, create and maintain such an organisation. Furthermore, section 16 of the same act allows the state to create specific funds for such an organisation. The members of the body shall also have the power of inspecting officers as per section 17 of the same act.

# **Benefits to the Public:** Implementing this Bill will benefit not just public health, but also encourage other states to transition into renewable energy. It will reduce the concentration of PM 10 and PM 2.5 in the atmosphere, which are generated when burning fossil fuels. Lower pollution-related illnesses will also mean less stress on the state's medical infrastructure, while improved air quality may allow for safe development of other large scale industries. As per a report by the IISc, there is no economic case for coal power plants in India. The faster we transition to renewable energy, the quicker we can ensure that all energy demands are met at a fair price. It will also reduce the likelihood of scams and concentration of wealth to a few wealthy families in the future.

# **Why hasn\'t there been action so far?** While the Government of Karnataka has set up a Renewable Energy Development Board to monitor and promote various projects, the state is still relying on coal and other fossil fuel imports from other states to meet its energy needs. So far, Karnataka has met its minimum requirements for RE generation, which has been covered intensively by the media. However, there has never been a discussion on the increasing energy needs as major industrial hubs grow in the state. Additionally, the KREDL has never cited a firm reason for the cancellation of nearly 12,600 MW of RE generation projects in the last 3 years, nor has it clarified why there is discrepancy in commissioning more projects in certain districts over others.

**ABOUT US\
**Make Parliament Great Again (#MPGA) is a citizen's initiative that
aims to raise public issues with representatives & decision makers from
across the political spectrum with an objective of reclaiming Parliament
as the House of the People.

**Sources**

[[https://kredl.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf-files/ECREGIONALWRKSHP/Karnataka%20Renewable%20Energy%20Policy%202022-27.pdf]{.underline}](https://kredl.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf-files/ECREGIONALWRKSHP/Karnataka%20Renewable%20Energy%20Policy%202022-27.pdf)

[[https://kredl.karnataka.gov.in/english]{.underline}](https://kredl.karnataka.gov.in/english)

[[https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/PIIS2542-5196(24)00114-1/fulltext#seccestitle170]{.underline}](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/PIIS2542-5196(24)00114-1/fulltext#seccestitle170)

[[https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/uploads/ecact2001.pdf]{.underline}](https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/uploads/ecact2001.pdf)

[[https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2452292921000898]{.underline}](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2452292921000898)

